# CCC Item 1 Script - Hugh Baldwin 2022

<!-- During their conversation, Max says "lots of people talk about Qubits but I'm not quite sure what they are". So, what is a qubit? Well as the name suggests, it is the quantum equivalent of a bit (qubit meaning quantum-bit). Qubits are used by quantum computers in the same way that a classical computer uses a bit, to store data. Where they differ, however, is that qubits can take advantage of superpositions. -->
  
During their conversation, Max says "lots of people talk about Qubits but I'm not quite sure what they are". So, what is a qubit? Well as the name suggests, it is the quantum equivalent of a bit (qubit meaning quantum-bit). Similarly to the bits in a classical computer, qubits are used by quantum computers to store data. Where they differ, however, is that qubits can take advantage of superpositions.

So now we've got another question, what is a superposition? Essentially, a superposition is a property of quantum particles (such as the ones used to create qubits) which allows them to be in multiple states at the same time, with different probabilities. For example, one of the qubits in a quantum computer might be in a state of 70% |1⟩ and 30% |0⟩, meaning that when the value of the qubit is measured, there is a 70% chance of the result being a 1 and a 30% chance of being a 0. It is impossible to know the state of a qubit until it is measured, and "collapses" into one of the two states. This doesn't sound like it would be very useful for a computer, right? Well as it turns out, it allows quantum computers to be much faster and more efficient than classical computers when running specifically designed algorithms. This is because a set of n qubits can be in a superposition of all $2^n$ states at once, which gives the possibility of much more complex algorithms, or the ability to calculate all possible combinations of inputs at once, and only output one answer (known as quantum parallelism).

Using said qubits in superposition, it is theoretically possible to create quantum computers vastly more "powerful" than classical computers. But what does "powerful" really mean? In the context of classical computing, you might say that a computer is more "powerful" because it's able to run a video game at a higher resolution or render a video faster. A quantum computer, on the other hand, couldn't come close to running Crysis or rendering a video and yet, I would still say that quantum computers are far more "powerful" than classical computers, or at least they could be in the future. Current quantum computers are far more similar to first-generation vacuum tube computers like the ENIAC, expensive machines that take up an entire room and are only capable of running a limited number of specifically designed algorithms. The difference here, however, is that the few algorithms that quantum computers can run, such as searching databases or factorising large numbers can run exponentially faster than on a classical computer.

But why does it matter that quantum computers can factorise numbers quickly? Well, Max suggests that "a quantum computer (...) could break most, if not all, current cryptographic algorithms". While it is true that some encryption algorithms, such as RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman), are vulnerable to quantum computers, other algorithms are known to be quantum resistant.

The security of asymmetric cryptographic algorithms such as RSA is based upon the difficulty of factorising large numbers, known as the factoring problem. To "break" the encryption of RSA, it is necessary to factorise very large numbers, somewhere between $10^{300}$ and $10^{1000}$ (depending upon the key size), which is very difficult using a classical computer. While some optimisations can be made, the current method (using the Number Field Sieve algorithm) effectively involves testing every possible combination of prime numbers, which is very slow. For example, it took a supercomputer 2700 "core years" to break RSA-250, a number with 250 digits ($10^{250}$). What this means is that if you encrypted some data with a 250-digit number, it would be safe from me and my quad-core laptop for just under 700 years. On the other hand, if I (somehow) had access to a quantum computer capable of efficiently running Shor's algorithm, the same data would be safe for a matter of theoretically mere minutes.

This may sound as though it's the end of internet privacy and security, but as I mentioned previously, there are several known quantum-resistant encryption algorithms, including some already in use today. For example, AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) is already widely used in military and wireless communication networks and is known to be quantum-resistant provided a large enough key is used. In addition to this, quantum computers are not yet advanced enough to be used to break encryption, as the "largest" number to be successfully factorised using a quantum computer is **21**.

My final thoughts about quantum computers are that while are likely to replace classical computers for specific tasks, such as running complex mathematical algorithms or analysing large amounts of data, it is unlikely to happen any time soon, and classical computers will still reign supreme in general-purpose applications, such as consumer PCs.