# Script Version 2 - Hugh Baldwin 2022 Core Computing Concepts Item 1

On line 5, Max says "Well you'd have to look up how they work - lots of people talk about Qubits but I'm not quite sure what they are, but I am told that on a practical level these Qubits make quantum computers more powerful than our current computers."
  
So, what is a Qubit? Well, a qubit is similar to a single bit of memory in a classical computer, in that one qubit can store one binary digit. Unlike a bit however, a qubit can be both a 1 and a 0 at the same time; this is known as a *superposition*. Now we've got another question to answer - what is a superposition? To put it simply, an object is in superposition when it's actual state is unknown, but you do know the probability of it being one or the other. A famous example of this is Schrödinger's cat, which was in a superposition of alive and dead, and of course you would only know for sure if it was alive once you open the box and look inside. Now I hear you say "That's great and all, but how does any of this make quantum computers more powerful?" and I will get to that, but first I need to define the term "more powerful".
  
Within the context of classical computing, "more powerful" has a fairly simple meaning, that one computer can perform an operation faster than another. However, when we talk about quantum computing we need to be more careful. For example, you might say that your friend's computer is "more powerful" than yours because it's able to run Crysis at twice the framerate, but no existing quantum computer could even come close to running a video game, and yet they're often labelled as the next breakthrough in computing. 
  
While quantum computers may not be as good for general-purpose applications as classical computers, there are some specific algorithms that run many times faster than would be possible otherwise. For example, as Max suggests in line 3, [show line 3 on-screen] quantum computers are "more powerful" for breaking encryption. One encryption algorithm that is at great risk from quantum computers is RSA, which is commonly used on the internet for encrypting data such as emails, VPNs, websites and more. RSA specifically is at risk because it relies on upon the fact that it is easy for classical computers to multiply numbers, but not to reverse that calculation and get the factors of a number. Quantum computers however, and more specifically Shor's Algorithm (which I don't have time to explain), is at least in theory exponentially faster at prime factoring than the Number Field Sieve algorithm used by computers today. This all sounds a bit doom and gloom, but there are many other common encryption algorithms that don't rely on this principle, for example AES, and are therefore known as "quantum immune" algorithms.
  
And now, finally, to explain *why* qubits and superpositions cause such drastic improvements in "power". First of all, a small number of qubits in superposition can represent a huge amount of information - just 1000 qubits could represent every number between 1 and 2^1000 - and operate on all of that information at the same time